A Novel Approach for Improving Recommender
System
Sunil Kumar Khatri 1 , Sonam Gupta 2
1,2
Amity Institute of Information Technology, Amity University Uttar Pradesh, Noida, India
1
sunilkkhatri@gmail.com, skkhatri@amity.edu
2
sonam.guptas@gmail.com
Abstract: Recommender systems these days tend to achieve status
and importance. The algorithms and approaches present in a
recommender system define the importance and worth of the
recommender systems. Till now, the research which have been
done has concentrated on generating the new approaches and
algorithms so that by implementing them some good
recommendations can be provided to the users. In this research
paper we propose that a recommender system can be developed
efficiently so that it can work beyond the conventional accuracy
conditions and this can be done by comparative study of any two
algorithms and generating a new algorithm based on the results
of both algorithms which would give some more accurate results.
Experimental results specifies that the people with different views
mostly tends to favor different types of algorithms. There are few
criteria for evaluating the recommender systems which can be
helpful in judging the performance.
Keywords: Recommender System, collaborating
evaluation of algorithms, content-based approach.
I.
filtering,
INTRODUCTION
E-Commerce is increasing widely in terms of quantity and
quality, the end-users spend huge time to select the products
and services. Recommender systems are used in nearly every
area which involves websites and android apps of e-commerce
websites that helps the user to select a vast collection of items
of their choice easily and efficiently [1]. These types of
systems usually offer the customers with a menu of
recommended items they want to choose, or supplies the
estimates that how much the customer desire for every item. A
recommender system is supported by well originated and
robust algorithm. This algorithm varies considerably according
to their effectiveness and efficiency. Thus, providing the user
with the most effective choices of product. Most algorithms
focuses on giving recommendations by analyzing some of the
searching patterns of the end-user’s. However, providing only
accuracy in results is inadequate. An example for this scenario
is: Suppose we are using a recommender system which works
only for recommending videos to end-user. Assume that all
recommendation suggested by system are for that videos
which we have already viewed. Though this recommender
system is very worthy in rating every videos which we have
viewed in order of likeness, this still would not be a good
recommender system. Despite of the exactness in this example
which is good performance, this system is not efficient as it
lacks in analyzing the limitations: frequent redundant and
978-1-5090-1489-7/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE
obsolete results. Unfortunately, this is same process from
which we presently check our recommender systems.
Mostly the frequent recommender systems take any of two
basic methods: collaborative filtering or content-based
filtering. Other methods (such as hybrid approaches) also exist.
Taking benefit of the "knowledge of crowds" (with
collaborative filtering) has been made simpler with the data-
collection chances the web gives. But the massive amounts of
available data also confuse this chance. For example, even if
several users' behavior can be demonstrated, other users do not
display typical behavior. These users can twist the outcomes of
a recommender system and reduces its efficiency. Further,
users can exploit a recommender system to favor one item
over another based on positive response on an item and
negative response on competitive items, for example [2],[3].
A good recommender system must manage these problems.
One problem that is common in recommender systems is the
problem of scalability. Traditional algorithms work well with
smaller amounts of data, but when the data sets grow, the
traditional algorithms can have difficulty keeping up. Although
this might not be a problem for offline processing, more-
specialized approaches are needed for real-time scenarios. A
recent example is the case of a large company that could
calculate a pregnancy-prediction score based on purchasing
habits. Through the use of targeted ads, a father was surprised
to learn that his teenage daughter was pregnant. The firm's
analyst was so precise that it could calculate a potential
mother's due date based on products or items she used to
frequently purchase [1].
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Recommender systems are the tools for filtering and sorting
items and information. The previous studies was built on the
fact that each time a user read a News article, the system
generates a valuable judgement and taken those estimations as
“ratings” and used the ratings to create their own calculations
which were displayed as part of the article heading [1] .
Ma et al [1] proposed a matrix factorization framework with
social regularization. They elaborated how social network
information can benefit recommender systems. They
interpreted the differences between social-based recommender
system and trust-aware recommender systems.
6022016 5 th International Conference on Reliability, Infocom Technologies and Optimization (ICRITO) (Trends and Future Directions), Sep. 7-9, 2016,
AIIT, Amity University Uttar Pradesh, Noida, India
The Ringo system[2] provided recommendations for musicians
using a similarity generation technique which was termed as
“social information filtering”. Video Recommender [3]
processes employed related algorithms to provide
recommendations through electronic-mail and web amid a
essential community of filmfan .
start whereas in content-based approach a major problem of
serendipitous item exists.
In this paper the two types of recommender systems are
compared: collaborative filtering and content-based
recommender
system.
Initially
working
of
both
recommendation system was identified and existing
parameters for generating results were analyzed. The
algorithms for similarity calculation and predicted rating
calculation were used to evaluate the results. Content-based
technique and collaborative filtering technique were
implemented by using Python programming language.
Collaborative filtering, mentioned as social filtering, filters
data by means of the recommendations of further individuals.
Results are generated on the basis of the idea that if a user
who had approved in the evaluation of some products or stuffs
in the past are probably to approve again on that similar types
of items in the future also. . We have tried to recommend
places using Bi-Clustering and Jaccard by adding new
parameters and eliminated the problem of cold start. Several
people who wants to see a movie for example, they might ask
for recommendations from their families or friends. Then in
that case the recommendations of those family members or
friends who have common type of taste related to movies are
considered more than recommendations given from others and
this information is used in the conclusion that which movie to
see.
Knijnenburg et al [5] developed a model which focuses on user
experience and social experimental approach. Ventakesh P et
al talked about how to reduce the traditional limitation of cold
start and how it can be overcome using fuzzy collaborative
filtering. In order to achieve this goal they aim to employ
various recommendation approaches with data analysis.
Gopalchari et al [6] focused on incorporating the domain
knowledge along with matching the similar user pattern for
recommender system. A different approach involves building a
system which recommends the web pages that can help the
fresh search situations and can advance the likeness of a user
for the host website. Experimental results shows that the
suggested novel approach produces an improvement in the
performance of a recommender system in terms of the worth of
the web page recommendations.
Ghazanfar and Prugel-Bennett [7] proposed a hybrid
recommendation model by combining the rating, feature, and
demographic information about items. The research showed
that the approach outperforms the state of the art recommender
system algorithms, and eradicates recorded problems with
recommender systems.
Content-based filtering also known as cognitive filtering,
suggests the items on the basis of comparison between the
parameters of the different items. The parameters of each item
are denoted as a set of descriptors or terms, usually the words
that occur in a document and which describes the item
genuinely. In content-based recommendation the keywords or
some particular parameters are taken for an item which
describes that item like properties of that item on the basis of
these keywords or parameters the rating of a particular item is
done. Particularly many individual items are matched with
items earlier ranked by the consumer and the best-matching
items are suggested.
Nandagawali
and Patil [8] focused on improving a
recommender system by involving community based user
domain model in which they incur rated social information of a
product by enhancing collaborative approach .The basic
purpose was to quantify the product’s needs by providing them
recommendations.
III. METHODOLOGY
Recommender systems are the tools for cleaning and
organizing items and information. Recommender systems are
a part of data filtering system that try to find out and calculate
the 'rating' or 'preference' that a user would provide to a
product. They have tendency to maintain and improvise the
quality of the judgments customers make while searching for
selecting the items or products.
The methodology adopted in this work involves following
steps-
Recommender system are very popular now-a-days and are
commonly used in recommending movies, music, news, books,
research articles, search queries, social tags, and items in
general. However, recommender systems also exists for
specialists, agents, jokes, eating places, commercial services,
life insurance, persons (online dating), and Twitter supporters
[1]. Today, recommendations are more particular and
modified. The primary disadvantage of using collaborative
approach is that it fails to produce results if there are no ratings
available or inadequate data exists, this is also known as cold
x Collecting data and cleaning it.
x Implementing existing algorithm into the data and finding
the best possible algorithm among them on the basis of
their outputs.
x Detailed analysis of both the approaches collaborative and
content-based.
x
Suggesting some new criteria for both the approaches, to
achieve better and more accurate recommendations.
The collaborative filtering will be done on the basis of two
indexes that are similarity and the other one is clustering .The
similarity index is resolved using jaccard similarity coefficient
also known as the Jaccard index. The clustering index will be
solved using bi-clustering to carry the clustering m x n
6032016 5 th International Conference on Reliability, Infocom Technologies and Optimization (ICRITO) (Trends and Future Directions), Sep. 7-9, 2016,
AIIT, Amity University Uttar Pradesh, Noida, India
matrix where m represents user’s rating and n denotes a hotel
overall rating, our algorithm is capable to cluster the
comparisons among users and items. The content-based
filtering will done by introducing some new parameters in the
data set which will improvise the outcomes as compared to
previous outcomes.
(A,B) = 1- J(A,B)= IAUBI=IAI+IBI-IA∩BI
(2)
In the proposed work, the Jaccard similarity coefficient
formula is used for calculating the similarity index for users
liking and rating of hotels . By using Jaccard’s index the
results are more accurate as compared to other methods such as
Euclidean distance method.
IV. PROPOSED WORK
After implementing Jaccard similarity coefficient, clustering
index is implemented. For applying clustering a technique
known as Bi-Clustering is used. By using Bi-Clustering, we
get a clustered m x n matrix of coherent values of rows and
columns at the same time where m specifies the user’s rating
and n represents the hotel overall value, our algorithm is
efficient to determine the similarity among users and items.
After that additive function is used to get the overall results
and if the values of any two inputs are common then again bi-
clustering is applied on so that a better result can be generated.
This research mainly focuses on enhancing the recommender
system. Both the methods that are collaborative filtering and
content-based filtering are studied and then they are
implemented on the Hotel and Resorts data. After
implementation
when
results
are
generated,
the
recommendation for hotels and resorts can be suggested to the
users. The recommendations for the hotels and resorts will be
given on the basis of the calculating the overall rating of each
hotel. The better one’s will be recommended to the users. The
data of Hotels and resorts rating is collected from the Hotel
and Resorts websites and from several other sources. We have
collected a large set of data and to bring some effectiveness we
have used only stratified data in our work. The data extracted
was in the text format which was parsed into Json format so
that it can be easily imported in the python script. For both the
approaches python is used to implement the programs of
collaborative filtering and content-based filtering. The tool
used for implementing Python 3.4 script is Anaconda 4.0.0
and the data set in Json format is saved with .json extension.
In content- based recommendation the keywords or some
particular parameters are taken for an item which describes
that item like as properties of that item on the basis of these
keywords or parameters the rating of a particular item is done.
Particularly many individual items are compared with items
earlier ranked by the consumer and the best-matching items are
suggested. The content-based filtering is done by introducing
some new parameters in the data set which has improvise the
outcomes as compared to previous outcomes.
Collaborative filtering filters data by means of the
recommendations of further individuals. It is generated on the
basis of the idea that if a user who had approved in the
evaluation of some products or stuffs in the past are probably
to approve again on that similar types of items in the future
also. The collaborative filtering is done on the basis of two
indexes : similarity and clustering . The similarity index is
solved using Jaccard similarity coefficient. The Jaccard
similarity coefficient also known as Jaccard index was
introduced by Paul Jaccard which is a common index for
binary variables. Jaccard index is a statistics used for relating
the similarity and range of sample set. In this the input is taken
as the form of sets for example set A and set B and then it is
defined as the size of the intersection divided by the size of the
union of the sample sets that are Set A and set B and in the
result it will measure the similarity of the two finite set A and
set B.
V.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Recommender systems are a type of system that help end user
to decide among new products without having sufficient
knowledge of that product. In collaborative approach, we have
used the jaccard coefficient in order to find the similarity index
of ratings provided by the end user. The data set gathered for
our approach was incorporating the user’s rating.
Figure 1 shows the data whose similarity index was calculated
using Euclidean method.
(1)
( If in case both the sets A and B are empty then it is defined as
J(A,B) =1 )
Fig. 1. Similarity Index using Euclidean
In the dataset, we have applied jaccard measure before
performing clustering of data. The data were clustered using
bi-clustering technique. Figure 2 shows our work, when all
techniques have been applied, the Hotel 4 was raised much
higher and now is recommended to user to stay.
The Jaccard similarity coefficient measures the similarity
index and Jaccard Distance measures the dissimilarities of the
two finite set which is given as:
6042016 5 th International Conference on Reliability, Infocom Technologies and Optimization (ICRITO) (Trends and Future Directions), Sep. 7-9, 2016,
AIIT, Amity University Uttar Pradesh, Noida, India
parameters which are sleep quality, service, value have given
efficient results to user.. Recommender system is a very
popular topic on which many research’s made been conducted
and can be performed.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Authors express their deep sense of gratitude to the Founder
President of Amity University, Dr. Ashok K Chauhan for his
keen interest in promoting research in the Amity University
and has always been an inspiration for achieving greater
heights.
Fig. 2. Similarity Index using Jaccard Coefficient
In content based approach, which incorporates analyzing
attributes of a product, we have added few more parameters
(sleep quality, service, location) in the data to give better
output for user. Table I represents the new added parameter
with the existing parameters and the best value which helps in
recommending a place to user.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
TABLE I: CONTENT BASED APPROACH
Name Cleanlines
s
Hotel
4.6
1
Hotel
4.7
2
Hotel
3.9
3
Hotel
4.7
4
Hotel
4.6
5
Hotel
4.6
6
Parameters
Sleep
Room
Service Location Value
Quality
4.4 4.6 4.6 4.3 4.2
4.3 4.4 4.1 4.5 4.2
4.0 4.1 2.3 3.2 3.2
4.6 4.8 4.7 4.5 4.4
2.4 1.2 2.5 1.4 2.5
4.2 4.1 3.5 1.2 1.2
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
VI. CONCLUSION
Recommender Systems are very useful in generating best
results for the user. Various approaches i.e. collaborative and
content based provide user with different places but provides
the best optimum result for them. In our work we have tried to
present a new approach will be helpful in recommending
results to user. We have tried to recommend places using Bi-
Clustering and Jaccard and by adding new parameters .This
work can be extended further by taking a large dataset which
involves many new places. We have tried to improvise content
based approach by adding new parameters but more
parameters can be added for further research work. We have
tried to reduce the problem of cold start by providing jaccard
index rating to our system to predict results and remove
serendipitous items by incorporating new parameters. Our new
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
605
J. Ben Schafer, Dan Frankowski, Jon Herlocker, Shilad Sen:
Collaborative Filtering Recommender Systems, The Adaptive
Web, Volume 4321 of the series Lecture Notes in Computer
Science,2012,pp. 291-324.
Adomavicius G. and Tuzhilin A: Toward the next generation of
recommender systems: a survey of the state-of-the-art and
possible extensions. Published in Knowledge and Data
Engineering, IEEE Transactions on (Volume:17, Issue: 6),
2011, pp. 734 – 749.
Hao Ma, Dengyong Zhou, Chao Liu, Michael R. Lyu, Irwin
King: Recommended system with social Regularization.
Published in Journal ACM Transaction on Information
Security,2010,pp-5-53.
Paola Massa, Paola Avessani: Trust Aware Recommended
System, Proceeding of the 2007 ACM Conference on
Recommender System pp. 17-24
Knijnenburg,Bela Gipp,Joran Beel,Christian Hentschel: A
Research paper on Recommender System.In Proceedings of
International Conference on Emerging Trends in Computing
(ICETIC’09). pp. 309-315.
Gopalchari, Middleton,S.E. Shadbolt,N.r. and De Roure:
Ontological User Profiling in Recommender Systems, ACM
Transactions on Information System (TOIS), vol.22,no.1,2011,
pp.54-88.
Ghazanfar, M.A., Prugel-Bennett, A: A Scalable, Accurate
Hybrid recommender System . Published in:Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, WKDD '10. Third International
Conference. IEEE.,2012, pp. 94-98.
Priyanka A.Nandagawali; Jaikumar M.Patil: Community based
recommender system based on products. Power,Automation and
communication International conf. on IEEE Publications
2014,pp. 150-153.
Jain, S.; Grover, A.; Thakur, P.S.; Choudhary, S.K: Trends,
problems and solutions of recommender system.Computing,
Communication and Automation (ICCCA), 2015 International
Conference. Publishers IEEE. pp. 955 – 958.
Young Choi; Jae Kyeong Kim: A Recommender System for
Tourism Product, 48th Hawaii International Conference on IEEE
Conference publication 2015, pp. 3354-3363.
Harper,F.Li.X.Chen,Y. and Konstan: A Economic model of
User Rating In An Online Recommender System,in Proceedings
of
the
10th
International
Conference
on
User
modelling,Edinburgh, U.K,2012, pp. 307-316.
